{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1036\deflangfe1036{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman{\*\falt Times New Roman};}
{\f242\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE{\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f243\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr{\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f245\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek{\*\falt Times New Roman};}
{\f246\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur{\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f247\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew){\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f248\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic){\*\falt Times New Roman};}
{\f249\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic{\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f250\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese){\*\falt Times New Roman};}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \fi280\li20\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1036\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1036 \snext0 \styrsid204333 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \fi280\li20\ri0\sb240\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1036\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1036 \sbasedon0 \snext0 \styrsid204333 heading 1;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden \styrsid204333 footnote reference;}{
\s16\ql \fi280\li20\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1036\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1036 \sbasedon0 \snext16 \ssemihidden \styrsid204333 footnote text;}}{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}
{\*\rsidtbl \rsid204333\rsid3352431}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.5604;}{\info{\title 1}{\author cornac}{\operator cornac}{\creatim\yr2007\mo7\dy18\hr12\min38}{\revtim\yr2007\mo7\dy18\hr12\min38}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages2}{\nofwords841}
{\nofchars4627}{\nofcharsws5458}{\vern24689}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1417\margr1417\margt1417\margb1417 \deftab708\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphhotz425\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1417\dgvorigin1417\dghshow1\dgvshow1
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nobrkwrptbl\snaptogridincell\allowfieldendsel\wrppunct
\asianbrkrule\rsidroot204333\newtblstyruls\nogrowautofit \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \fi280\li20\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1036\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1036 {\insrsid3352431 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \fi280\li20\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1036\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1036 {\insrsid3352431 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \fi280\li20\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1036\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1036 {\insrsid3352431 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \fi280\li20\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1036\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1036 {\insrsid3352431 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linex0\headery708\footery708\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain 
\s1\ql \fi280\li20\ri0\sb240\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0\pararsid204333 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1036\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1036 {\insrsid204333 1.\tab INTRODUCTION}{\cs15\super\insrsid204333 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\s16\ql \fi280\li20\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0\pararsid204333 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1036\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1036 {\cs15\super\insrsid3352431 \chftn }{\insrsid3352431 
We thank many people for their help: Mary Laughren for access to the }{\i\insrsid3352431 Warlpiri Dictionary}{\insrsid3352431 , Robert Hoogenraad, Jenny Green and Myf Turpin for arranging Miriam Corris\rquote 
s work in Central Australia; Mark Donohue, Lipiyus Biniluk and Johnson Haan for help with Corris\rquote s work on Lani and Adang; Denise Angelo and Margaret Sharpe for arranging Susan Poetsch\rquote s work; Carmel O\rquote 
Shannessy, Elizabeth Ross Nungarrayi, Margaret Carew, Marija Tabain and Robin Hardiman for help with Jane Simpson\rquote 
s work; Margaret Florey, Kevin Jansz, David Nash, Peter Oram and the audiences at the Central Australian Linguistics Circle, the Applied Linguistics Association of Australia\rquote s Annual Congress, th
e University of Sydney Linguistics Postgraduate Seminar, and the Endangered Languages Workshop. The work was funded in part by Australian Research Council small grants to Manning and Simpson in 1998 and 1999.}}}{\b\insrsid204333 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \fi280\li20\ri0\widctlpar\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0\pararsid204333 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1036\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1036 {\insrsid204333 
Linguists have seen creating dictionaries of endangered languages as a key activity in language maintenance and revival work. However, like any approach to language engineering, there are concerns to address. The first is the tension betwe
en language documentation and language maintenance}{\cs15\super\insrsid204333 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s16\ql \fi280\li20\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0\pararsid204333 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1036\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1036 {
\cs15\super\insrsid3352431 \chftn }{\insrsid3352431  The term \lquote preservation\rquote  is often used in disc
ussion of language endangerment.  However, it is used ambiguously between preserving a language for science in the future by documenting it, and preserving it for the speakers as a living language by helping them maintain it.}}}{\insrsid204333 
. The second is the role of literacy. A lot of effort has been put into vernacular literacy, on the assumption that it assists language maintenance, as well as language documentation. In some respects this
 is a dubious assumption, because writing a language does not necessarily lead to speaking it or maintaining the language. Moreover, in some cases putting effort into writing the language can detract from efforts to encourage learners to speak the languag
e. It is certain that much more effort should be put into oral language development. 
\par In this paper, however, we focus on the structural issues arising from this relation between language documentation and maintenance, discussing literacy to the extent that
 varying levels of literacy result in different abilities to use dictionaries, as well as uses of, and attitudes towards dictionaries.
\par }\pard \ql \fi280\li20\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0\pararsid204333 {\insrsid204333 Historically, dictionaries for endangered languages have been mainly concerned with the task of preserving the languages 
for future study or revival. The major audience for these dictionaries was felt to be other people from literate traditions, such as linguists and researchers (Schebeck 1983). To this end most of the literature on the subject deals with the problems of re
presenting the particular language as exhaustively as possible in a written form (Corris 1999). Such \lquote documentation dictionaries\rquote }{\b\insrsid204333  }{\insrsid204333 
are, in principle, vast and encyclopaedic as they attempt to capture most of what the lexicographer thinks a speaker knows, if they know the meaning of a given word and can use it.
\par Another use for dictionaries has been providing evidence for the speakers and others of the status of the minority language as a \lquote real\rquote  language, one that is recognised as an equal of the language of wi
der communication (LWC). We could call this the \lquote symbolic\rquote }{\b\insrsid204333  }{\insrsid204333 function of the dictionary.
\par Documentation is still very much an issue for speakers of some languages. However, emerging literacy among speakers of the endangered languages creates a new range of users and uses for dictionaries. We will call these the \lquote maintenance dictionaries
\rquote  (although their range can include language renewal). The structure of these is the focus of this paper. 
\par When designing a dictionary for an endangered language (EL), we have t
o consider first the uses that the speakers may want to make of the dictionary, and then the useability of the dictionary for such users. In the first part of the paper we discuss uses by looking at the views on potential dictionary organisation of some s
peakers of endangered languages. In the second part of the paper we summarise some of our findings on}{\b\insrsid204333  }{\insrsid204333 useability}{\b\insrsid204333  }{\insrsid204333 of dictionaries of Australian Aboriginal languages.
\par Generally speaking, dictionaries for endangered languages have similar macrostructures, and differ mostly in the amount of information in certain parts of the microstructure. 
\par }\pard \ql \fi280\li20\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0\pararsid204333 {\b\insrsid204333 Macrostructure.}{\insrsid204333 
\par }\pard \ql \fi280\li20\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0\pararsid204333 {\insrsid204333 
EL dictionaries are almost always bilingual, because the makers are usually not speakers. The main body is usually arranged as EL-LWC. Occasionally, such di
ctionaries have LWC-EL finderlists, sometimes separated into semantic domains. The EL-LWC direction is important for two reasons.
\par 
\par (i)\tab This arrangement is typically most useful for speakers of LWC (including the lexicographer) trying to learn, understand or explicate the EL, in other words for decoding EL. 
\par 
\par (ii)\tab It can also be put down to the symbolic function of the dictionary. Speakers sometimes feel that EL-LWC is the only direction that could truly be described as a dictionary of the EL. Having the EL first gives it a kind of primacy.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid204333 Microstructure.
\par }{\insrsid204333 The microstructure of EL dictionaries differ according to how big the dictionaries are. Most of the bigger ones include vernacular definitions and example sentences for some words; these are useful because
 they can contain cultural and grammatical information. This information is also useful for further study and documentation as well as for speakers maintaining the language. Actual definitional practice varies from one or two LWC glosses, to structured en
tries. Part of speech information is usually included.
\par Many of these properties of the macro- and microstructure have been taken for granted by lexicographers. Now, the emerging literacy among EL speakers means that these properties now have to be reconsidered. 
\par Linguists and lexicographers hope that EL dictionaries can free learners (both of language and of literacy) from dependence on teachers, allowing them to learn independently. To some extent this view is shared by literate speakers of indigenous langu
ages. It seems that EL speakers often agree that documentation and maintenance are important functions of a dictionary (Carroll 1999). There is also anecdotal evidence to suggest that the dictionary is important in the minds of speakers as symbolic of the
 status of the language. But there is little record}{\cs15\super\insrsid204333 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s16\ql \fi280\li20\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0\pararsid204333 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1036\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1036 {
\cs15\super\insrsid3352431 \chftn }{\insrsid3352431 Dictionaries made by speakers
 themselves need further investigation. Margaret Florey (p.c.) reports two wordlists made by speakers, one with the order LWC-EL, and the other with the order EL-LWC. Both are trilingual with just single word definitions in each language. Supusepa (1998) 
i
s a professionally published sketch grammar and wordlist for the language of Saparua Island, central Maluku.  The wordlist order is Dutch - Malay (Melayu Sini, the Dutch Malay variant) - Saparuan. Tamaela (1998) is a typed manuscript sketch grammar and wo
rdlist for the Amahai language of Seram Island, central Maluku.  The wordlist order is Amahai - Malay - Dutch. }}}{\insrsid204333  of negotiations between speakers of endangered languages and dictionary makers, in particular of speakers\rquote 
 views on dictionary structure (perhaps because in some cases the speakers were not previously aware of dictionaries) (but see McConvell et al 1983, Carroll to appear, and Stebbins 1999). 
\par }\pard \ql \fi280\li20\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin20\itap0 {\insrsid204333 
\par }}