<?xml version="1.0"?>
<xhtml>
<head>
<title>Sikaiana Dictionary Example</title>
</head>

<body>

<p><a name="a.1"></a><b>a<sup><small>1</small></sup></b> (&lt; PPN *'a) <i>[personal pronoun
and proper name marker] </i>a marker appearing optionally: (1) before sentence
initial pronouns and personal names, and (2) after transitive verbs; and occurring
obligatorily after the prepositions <i>i</i> and <i>ki</i>. <i>A Sina ni
tautali i a Puna</i>, 'Sina followed Puna'. </p>

<p><a name="a.2"></a><b>a<sup><small>2</small></sup></b> <i>[preposition, marking 'a' class
alienable possession] </i>of, belonging to. <i>te kapu a Sina</i>, 'the cup of
Sina'; <i>te tama a Puna</i>, 'the (genetic) child of Puna'. See also: <a href="o.2"><i>o<sup><small>2</small></sup></i></a>.</p>

<p><a name="a.laa"></a><b>a laa</b> <i>[nq,
preceding noun, plural] </i>other, some other. <i>I te puina, maatou ni nnoho i
Muli Akau ia, a laa tama ni nnoho i Hale</i>, 'during the <i>puina,</i> we
stayed at the outer islands, the other people stayed on the main island'. See
also: <a href="laa.5"><i>laa<sup><small>5</small></sup></i></a>.</p>

<p><a name="aa"></a><b>aa</b> <i>[interrogative
pronoun] </i>what?. <i>aa</i> replaces nouns and verbs in interrogative
statements. <i>Te aa ku tele?</i>, 'what is running?'; <i>te vaka ku aa?</i>,
'what is the ship doing?' or, 'what is happening about the ship?'; <i>ee aa?</i>,
'what is going on?' or, 'what are you up to?'; <i>a koe ku aa?</i>, 'how are
you feeling?' or, 'what are you doing at this specific moment?'; <i>koe e noho
ki aa?</i>, 'you are staying for what purpose?'. </p>

<p><a name="aa.ko"></a><b>aa ko</b> <i>[exclamation,
short for </i>heaa ko<i>] </i>what else?, how else?, what is your explanation?.
Appears most frequently after an explanation of a situation and the speaker
wants the listener to admit the explanation is obvious or forward an
alternative explanation.</p>

<p><a name="aha"></a><b>aha</b> <i>[na] </i>the
shell tool used for measuring the spaces between mesh in nets (<i>seu manu,
kupena</i>). See also: <a href="atumata"><i>atumata</i></a>, <a href="kalemata"><i>kalemata</i></a>, <a href="tia.1"><i>tia<sup><small>1</small></sup></i></a>.</p>

<p><a name="ahaa"></a><b>ahaa</b> (&lt; PPN
*afaa) <i>[n] </i>a cyclone, a tidal wave. </p>

<p><a name="aaha"></a><b>aaha</b> 1. <i>[vt]
</i>to open up, to push apart, as in pushing apart branches in order to look
through. 2. <i>[vt] </i>to open up a new settlement or start a new garden. 3. <i>[vt]
</i>to start, to begin a new project or way of life. <i>Tapa mai a koe ko hano
i mua ki aaha te ala o te taina</i>, 'you called upon me to go first (to
school) to open the way for my brother (MS)'. Passive: <i>ahania.</i></p>

<p><a name="ahali"></a><b>ahali</b> <i>[nf]
</i>a fish species, surgeon fish species. </p>

<p><a name="ahana"></a><b>ahana</b> <i>[np]
</i>the path in front of the lineage houses (<i>hale henua</i>). Traditionally,
no house building or living was allowed in these paths. (PCR) </p>

</body>

</xhtml>